---
layout: post
title: Week 1
---


When I hear “open source”, I think of a software development model that has most effectively utilized the connectivity capabilities computing has achieved in the past two to three decades. I think of people from around the world joining together to help create a product or resource that promises to improve the technological landscape, even if just a tiny bit. Open source is programming at its purest, a celebration of how far computers and networking has brought us.

There are a number of substantial benefits of open source software as opposed to closed source. First, the status of free and accessible shifts the culture of open source drastically, both of its development and distribution. The lucrative opportunities that have risen with the proliferation of software development have sparked a culture of secrecy and sometimes extreme competition amongst companies. Open source is an exciting alternative to this world, with participants fundamentally believing that great software can be a large scale collaborative effort, one that everyone has a right to access and use free of charge. This simple ethos has fundamentally changed contemporary culture through projects like Wikipedia, and is one of the biggest pushes towards keeping the world wide web a fair and free platform.

Additionally, the massive amounts of brainpower that the development of an open source project brings together allows large scale projects to be gain significant progress in a short period of time. Examples such as Tensorflow, requiring not only a massive amount of libraries and code, but also documentation and tutorials, have become robust in a comparatively short period of time thanks to being open sourced.

Most important to me, since its code is publicly available, open source software is transparent, and its users, alongside its development community, have the opportunity to see what exactly may be in programs they are using. Under the scrutiny of hundreds if not thousands of developers, this transparency virtually guarantees that an open source project is safe to use (correct me if I am wrong though).  

However, these qualities that make an open source project great also create obstacles for developers and users. The lack of centrality of projects, and the sometimes hundreds or thousands of contributors, can potentially result in a project that is not as focused and easy for the end user to use. Additionally, considering the voluntary nature of open source development, getting support regarding bugs or other issues can be trickier, as one has to rely on user communities rather than dedicated customer support that private companies employ.

Open Source appeals to me because it makes sense and is not centered around monetary gain. Often feeling extremely skeptical and frequently hopeless over big tech’s capabilities to instigate or aid evil to generate enormous profits (some examples including selling information, aiding in warfare, or providing surveillance), the model of open source, through its transparency and lack of profit motivation, presents perhaps a utopian alternative to closed source development that has not been matched yet. 

Some examples of open source projects:

Firefox:

Firefox is a web browser by Mozilla, originally created in 2002 by developers of the influential early web browser Netscape. Released in 2004, it offered a faster, more secure, and customizable alternative to Microsoft’s Internet Explorer, and enjoyed considerable popularity and usage share. Though its share has fallen with the rise of Chrome, Firefox still , placing emphasis on privacy and dsecurity

Tensorflow:

Tensorflow is a machine learning library originally developed by Google Brain. Encompassing resources for beginners, such as tutorials and examples, as well as for experts, such as more advanced customization and experimentation, the project has amassed a large amount of extensions, datasets, models, and documentation through community contributors as well as Google.

React:

React is a Javascript library used to create user interfaces on the web. It is maintained by Facebook as well as the open source community, and utilized by many front end web developers today thanks to its speed, scalability and simplicity.

Wikipedia:

Wikipedia is the largest online Encyclopedia which relies on a community of volunteers to contribute, edit, and moderate its content. Aiding this human labor, Wikipedia also makes use of bots to perform mundane tasks across the website, as well as to detect and revert vandalism. Users can code and submit bots to be reviewed and possibly implemented on the website.
